So let's make some todos.
So we need to create a new todo form,
which we already did as a test case.
I went through and
show you how to do it as a client.
But I'm gonna try to make a form that
submits data without using JavaScript.
I know when was the last time
we've done that, this is OG stuff.
But we're gonna do that.
So I'm actually gonna get rid of
the client, get rid of the state,
get rid of all this.
And we're gonna make a form that
submits on the server side.
So just hang tight with me.
Where am I using this?
I got to take it out somewhere.
Yeah, I got to take it out of
the home page, otherwise it'll break.
So I'm gonna take that out right quick.
There we go.
Okay, it's just a homepage now.
And then for the actual new todo
form before we build it out and
talk about server actions, I just need
to figure out where I wanna put it.
It's a form it never changes.
So I'm probably just gonna put
it in the dashboard layout.
It's gonna put it here.
So right above here,
I'm just gonna put the new todo form.
You can also put it inside of
the todo page, that's also fine.
But the reason I'm gonna put it in here
instead of the todo page is that I don't
want the form to wait on the todo page, to
load in todos, in order to see the form.
If it was in the same page and
the todos took two seconds to load,
then you wouldn't see the form for
two seconds.
So if I put it in the layout, it'll show
instantly while the todos are loading.
But then you might ask yourself,
why would you let someone interact with
the form if the todos haven't loaded?
We're not gonna talk about that.
That's a UX problem.
That's not my job.
I'm not a UX designer.
So that's why I put that there.
So it's not bound.
There's no reason to punish this form
because it's in a page that's slow,
it's not fair.
So I'll put it in a layout
that renders instantly.
Okay, so there we go and
it's right there you just can't see
it because there's no style on it.
So let me add a style to
the form I guess for now.
Class name, border, border black,
25% opacity, something that.
There you go now you can see it.
So let's get into the next thing then,
which is gonna be,
it says loading an error, but
we'll actually do server actions first,
then we'll come back to loading error.
I think it's better to talk about
server actions first since we're kind
of already here.
So server actions,
the best way I can describe server,
actually, you've been
doing server actions.
If you've ever made an API, you've
already been doing server actions, right?
A server action is like running code
on the server, that's literally it.
So why this thing called server actions
if we've already been doing that?
Well, what if you didn't have
to set the route up yourself.
What if it was just set up for you?
What if you could just call a function
that gets executed on the server?
That's basically what a server action is.
Your ability to call a function
that gets executed on the server.
I mean, which is exactly what
happens if you hit an API.
But you don't have to
set up the API yourself.
You don't have to worry about the route,
you don't do any of that stuff.
And depending on when you use that action,
you can actually trigger it without
using JavaScript in the case of forms.
So that means you can
have a pretty interactive
app without any JavaScript on it.
If all your app was was forms, which I
know brings us back to when JavaScript and
HTML was first invented yeah cool story,
but
it's you won't get full
page reloads either.
So you kind of get
the best of both worlds.
Yeah, so it's not back in a we submit a
form and it's just you're just waiting for
the whole thing to reload.
You still not getting that.
But yeah, you execute code on the server.
And this is same thing as something PHP,
literally the same thing as
something like Elixir and Phoenix.
It's literally the same thing.
The only difference is,
it's all JavaScript.
Whereas with those languages,
you will do PHP on the back end, but
then you're doing JavaScript on front end,
or you're doing Phoenix and
Elixir on the back end,
you're doing JavaScript on front end.
This is just all JavaScript, which could
be a benefit if you know JavaScript.
So it's really cool.
Okay, so how do you make a server action,
there's two ways basically
if you are in a component.
All you have to do is make a function and
just use the use
server directive at the top of that
function, this is one way you can do it.
We're gonna do it the other way, but
this is just one way you can do it and
then you can use that
function almost anywhere.
There are some caveats,
we'll talk about that.
But the preferable one and
the one that we'll be doing right now is
using it on the action prop on a form.
So an action prop is basically a function
to run when the form is submitted.
If you just put a function there,
it'll reload the whole page and do things.
We're going to run this server
action when this form is updated.
So that's one way todo it.
Another way todo it is to basically,
the way that we're gonna
do it is we're going to create
another file in our utils.
I'm gonna call it actions.
At the very top of this file,
I'm gonna say use server.
So I'd rather have use
server in this entire file.
And then that way everything in this
file is gonna be guaranteed to execute
on the server.
So I'm just gonna do that.
And we're gonna make a new action.
We're gonna export it, and
it's just a function that creates a todo.
I'm gonna call it new todo.
It takes in some content, and it's just
gonna import the database and use that.
So we're gonna say import DB from,
actually we don't have todo the at sign,
we're right next to it,
DB And
I'm just gonna say todo equals,
need to async this.
So todo = await dbtodo.create.
And you wanna add a property called data,
and
data is all the things that
you need to create todo with.
In this case, the only thing todo
needs to be created is content.
Everything else is either defaulted or
not necessary.
How do I know that?
We wrote the schema.
So we can just look right here.
ID gets generated.
Created at gets generated.
Content, if it had a question mark on it,
that means it'd be optional.
It doesn't, so we have to add content.
Completed is also required,
but it also has a default, so
we don't have to supply it.
So really, the only you have to pass
to it todo to create this content.
So that's what we did.
Prisma knows that too.
If I get rid of this,
it'll scream at me, hey.
If you forget, if you read this,
you will see that it's asking me for
content somewhere else here.
You just gotta read it very carefully,
cool.
So we have our todo.
Now the only problem
with the server actions.
Unlike API calls where you
can open up http requests,
hit the API, get back a response.
You can't respond back.
So that's probably a big
blocker right there.
That's a big no.
You kind of need that.
If you're performing some action,
you need a response back.
So that's why server actions
are really good for side effects.
If you don't know what a side effect is, a
side effect is basically like a site, for
instance, if you've ever done analytics,
you've ever rigged analytics for an app,
every time you'd call track,
that's a side effect.
The app doesn't depend on
you calling analytics.
It's probably happening in the background
as the person navigates through the app.
You're not sitting there waiting,
showing a loading screen until
you finish this track, right?
It's just happening.
On the side, it's a side effect.
So server actions are great for
side effects, things that have to
happen on the server in which the UI or
the user doesn't need to wait for.
Maybe you have some asynchronous event
driven architecture that's handled by
web hooks.
So you can just fire this that fires a web
hook and sell the response to it later.
Who knows, but
it's great for side effects.
If you need to change or what next js
would say, mutate your back end, you turn
your back end basically this means not
only did you change something on your
database or whatever source of truth you
have, but you need the response from it.
If you need todo that,
you can still use our actions and
that's what we're gonna do.
But I think right now,
I would probably still just do
all that on a client for now.
I think if you need to change the UI based
off something that happened on the back
end, you should probably just make an API
call on the front end, in my opinion.
The same way you've ever used React.
Just do a useEffects or whatever, or
onClick call this function
that does a fetch.
I would probably still do that right now,
although, as you'll see,
we'll be able to do this.
So we have a todo,
we created it, let's see what happens
before we try to get it back.
So let's bring it into our new form todo.
So instead of our new new todo form,
I'm gonna bring in that action.
It's called a new todo.
So I'm just gonna say new todo.
Bring that in here.
And then on the form,
I'm gonna say action this.
And I'm gonna say new todo, like so,
the last thing I need to do is
add a button here that says,
new todo, and give it a type submit that.
So because we added this to the form now,
which means the form is gonna pass in
whatever argument goes to this function,
whereas before when we wrote it.
We assume we're gonna get content.
Well, now that it's on a form,
we're actually not gonna get content.
We're gonna get something
called form data.
We're gonna get form data.
So form data is just an object that
you can use to get data from a form.
So in this case, we'll say form data.get,
and then the name of the input on
which we wanna get the value from.
So I haven't given this input a name,
let's give it one.
So I'll say the name of
this input is content.
Right, you can call it whatever you want.
You can call it todo,
you can say whatever.
I'm just gonna say content.
And then now in my actions,
I can say formData.get('content').
By the name of that input that, this is
just freaking out because it doesn't any.
Cool if you've never seen this before,
this is a standard, form data is
actually standards, not something
created by next js, it's a web standard.
And I think that's what I kind of
like about what they're doing is that
they're just relying on
standards going forward.
Even when we get to API's, you'll see
they're just relying on standards.
They're not creating some new thing,
which I think is really cool.
Looks we're coming full circle,
just getting back to the basics.
But even more complicated somehow,
so it's kinda cool to see it happen.
Okay, so now we have that,
let's go see what we broke.
Yeah, so now you can see
right now it's saying, yeah,
you wanna use server actions you
have to add this to your config.
So what we need todo is go
down to the root of our app.
You should see a file called
next.config.js at the top here
in this object.
You can add experimental,
that's an object and
you can add server actions,
you can add true, so yeah, turn that on.
Once we have that on,
we should get that error to go away.
We might have to do a rebuild on that.
No, I guess not.
I guess it figured itself out.
Okay, so there we go.
Now let's try to create a new todo and
see what happens.
I'm just gonna open up the network
panel so we can observe some things.
I'm just gonna type in something here,
new todo.
I'm just gonna click new todo.
And you can see immediately
a request fired off.
Remember, we did not write any
network code to fire off a request,
so that's one thing.
And we don't have an API
route that handles this.
So, why did it fire and where did it fire?
So, you can see right here, it fired
a post request to the page that we're on.
And if we look at the payload of it.
Yeah, it's got some stuff we didn't write,
what is that?
We didn't write that.
It's got some action thing.
It's got the content that we added,
but we didn't add any of this stuff.
So this is the part that I'm saying
though it does the API routing and
submitting for you for free.
You could do it yourself with
client side JavaScript, but
this is happening on the server or
this has been executed on a server.
So then if we go look at the terminal
here, we don't have any any error so that
means it probably saved to the database so
we can check the database right click.
Easiest way todo that is in another
terminal type MPX, Prisma, Studio.
If you type that in another terminal,
it opened up this other app on localhost
55 55 where you can browse
your database visually and
you can see I have one todo
in there called new todo.
So it worked,
it went to the database, no problems.
Well, except there's one problem.
It didn't show up on the page.
I made a new todo and we know we're
pulling all the to dues on this page.
We saw it.
It was a it was an empty array.
Why is it not there?
Well, if I just refresh,
ergo this shows up now on the page.
But why do I have to refresh
it after I save that?
That's kind of gross, right?
We want that just to pop up immediately.
And this is why I said server actions
are really great for mutations,
because if you need the UI to be updated
after you perform a server action,
it's not as simple.
You don't get that for free as you would
waiting for a response on an http call
where you can, I'm just gonna await
this fetch, and then get the result and
then do whatever I want with the result,
or even do an optimistic update.
You can do all of that
with server actions.
You can do automatic updates,
it's a lot harder.
But at that point, you're writing client
side code, you need client side code,
optimistic updates, so I might have
to choose a client site fetch.
But for now, we're gonna get around all
of that by tapping into the revalidation.
The revalidation functionality.
So, if you look at the page
in which needs to be updated,
whenever this server action is
created is gonna be /todos,
right we want /todos to re-fetch its
data cuz what is it doing on load?
It's getting all the todos.
So we wanna re-validate.
This page is cached right now.
So we wanna tell next.js, hey,
after we perform the server action,
re-validate this page, which will
then tell it to go fetch its data.
So that's what we wanna do
after our server action.
So let's do that.
So we can go into our action.
And right after we do this, we can
just say, yeah, just do a revalidate.
Right-click, revalidate path for
slash todos.
You can think of this as a soft refresh.
It's not gonna refresh the page, but
it's gonna expire the cache of that page,
which then forces it to
go refresh its data.
So let's do that.
So now when I add a new todo,
clean my room,
it shows up on the page
without me refreshing.
That's because we did a server action
on the server,that changed something in
the database.
We waited for that to happen.
And then we told next.js,
delete the cache for this page /todos,
which then made it go fetch
its own data all over again,
which then got an array of two todos and
put them on the page.
The crazy thing about this is that this
would work even with JavaScript off,
because there's no JavaScript on
the front end that's making this happen.
It would work completely
without JavaScript.
And that's the benefit of server actions
that you can have interactive apps
without JavaScript.
But you can also do this
without writing JavaScript.
Just use a pure HTML too.
So it's kind of cool to see
next js come around to this and
building this functionality.
But we've had this functionality
before frameworks existed, but
not in a structured way.
So I guess this is kind of the best of
both worlds, having that structure but
also kind of getting back to
the standards of the web, form actions,
response objects, things that,
which I think is kind of cool.
Okay, so yeah, any questions on that?
When I first saw this,
I thought it was just pretty magical.
But then I realized,
it's just like web standard stuff.
But it is still pretty cool to be able to
use React purely as a templating engine
and not have to rely on it for heavy
client-side stuff unless you opt into it.
So it's kind of cool.
Yeah, but any questions on that?
No, so yeah, we can just keep
adding stuff right here, right?
We can be, hello, yellow, whatever.
And then if we refresh this,
they should still be there
because we're pulling that down.